# Human Society is proportional to economy.
# PREHISTORIC : no document evidence
  * stone age
  * burzahom site : burzahom : kashmir : human and animal skelton with trepanning ( dogs, antelered deer ), pit dwelling
                              |
                              first excavation by : Helmet De Terra, Thomas Paterson ( 1935)
  *Robert Bruce Foote : British geologist, archeologist : father of indian pre history : documented antiquities of stone age
  *paintings : rock shelter and caves of Bhimbetka : abdullahganj  Raisen District ( MP ) : discoverer - Vishnudhar Wakankar, 1957
                   : in foothills of Vindhyan Mountains on south edge of central indian plateau
                   : rock cut paintings of ajanta and bagh : post mauryan period
                                                                Amravati : cairn architecture : Shunga's period/ Satvahana period


# PROTOHISTORIC : evidence but not deciphered
   * b/w pre historic and historic
   * Indus valley civilization/ Harappa Civilization/ Bronze Age/ Secular: non Aryan: urban
                 @ distinctive objects: seals( > 3000, major finding), beads, weights, stone blades, baked brick
                                                   |
                                                  discoverer: Daya Ram Sahni, 1921, at Harappa,  left bank of Ravi River,  Montgomery district (Sahiwal now), Punjab province, Pakistan
                                                                                                                   |
                                                                                                                * Period: 2300 BC to 1700 BC, as indicated by carbon-14 
                                                                                                                * culture covered: Punjab, Sindh, Baluchistan, Gujarat, Rajasthan, west UP
                                                                                                                * extended from   Jhelum-river to Hindon river, a tributary of Yamuna river in South (Alamgirpur)
                                                                                                                                             consisted of Chenab, Ravi, Sutlej and Jhelum; Ganga being exception
                                                                                                                                             Manda (J&K) in the north to the Daimabad (Maharashtra) in the South
                                                                                                                                             Sutkagen Dor of Baluchistan in the West to Alamgir Pur Meerut (UP) in the north
                                                                                                                                             forming triangle, 13 lakhs sq km: larger than Pakistan, and Egypt and Mesopotamia.
                                                                                                                * known to silver: evidence: Mohanjodaro and Harappa: mines of Zawar and Ajmer, Rajasthan & Afghanistan, Iran.
                                                                                                                * pottery: bright/ dark red and uniformly sturdy and well baked: Mehrgarh
                                                                                                                               : wheel-made wares: plain:  red clay with or without a fine red slip
                                                                                                                                                                painted: red and black
                                                                                                                               : proves- IVC existed before Aryan Civilization(pre aryan): beginning of idol worship
                                                                                                                   Polychrome pottery: vases decorated with geometric patterns, mostly in red black green and less frequently in white yellow
                                                                                                                   colour- scheme: painting:  light black, chocolate, light red over buff or greenish- buff background
                                                                                                                * Marshall-  director of the archaeological excavation, 1902 to 1928
                                                                                                                                 -  appointed Mr. R.B. Dayaram Sahni, who carried out excavations in the Larkana district of Sindh province &
                                                                                                                                    Montgomery district of Punjab on the right side of Ravi
                                                                                                                                 -  discovered the ruins of Harappa, 1921.
                                                                                                                                 -  founded Takshashila (1913-34)
                                                                                                                         excavator of Lord Shiva
                                                                                                                         Pashupati seal: 3- faced male God, surrounded by a rhino, buffalo, elephant, tiger: show that Shiva was worshipped
                                                                                                                         cylindrical stones: Lingam was worshipped
                                                                                                                * Cotton: for clothing ( 3000 BC first in India): reached Greece: Hindon, in Egypt: 2500 BC
                                                                                                                * Cemetry R-37, Harappa: Ravi river
                                                                                                                * Female dieties also worshipped
                                                                        

                                                                   : Rakhal Das Banerji, 1922,  at Mohenjodaro, right bank of the Indus River, Larkana District, Sindh, Pakistan
                                                                                                                       |
                                                                                                          population:  Proto-Australoids (Caucasian),  Mediterraneans, Alpines, Mongoloids
                                                                   : Alexander Cunningham: first archaeologist who excavated Harappa, but could not recognize its significance
                                                                  

                @  source of knowledge: Archaeological excavations
                @  other contributors of this civilisation: K.N. Dixit, Ernest Mackay, Aurel Stein, A. Ghosh, J.P. Joshi
                @  gold, silver, copper and brass found, exception: iron;  lacked in weapons; ruled by class of merchants
                @  remains of lion has not been excavated, excavated: cow and elephant, horse: in dispute(NO)
                @  known for:  town planning, agricultural work, industrialization, Mohenjodaro and Harappa, Burnt brick buildings
                @  origin a/c to :
                                           E.J.H. Mackay: migration of people from Sumer  (Southern Mesopotamia)
                                           D.H. Gordon and Mortimer Wheeler: migration of idea of civilization from Western Asia
                                           Amalananda Ghosh: pre Harappan culture matured into Harappan civilization
                                           MF Rafi que Mughal: region of Ravi river at Harappa, not inspired by Mesopotamian civilization
                @ discovery of a new civilization: announcer: John Marshall, Director-General of the ASI
                @ Twin capital of an Extensive Kingdom: Harappa and Mohenjodaro, by Stuart Piggott
                @ Peak growth: 2300 BC to 1900 B.C
                @ Mesopotamia and Egyptian civilization: contemporary to the Indus civilization
                @ Ancient Civilisations of World: Egypt, Mesopotamia, Indus Valley
                @ no trace of theocratic or organized religion: only religious source: statues of mud, stone, seals; Shiva, Pashupati and animals like snake, elephant were worshipped; Linga and Yoni
                @ Founders a/c to : 
                                                 * Dr. Laxman Swaroop: Arya    * V. Gordon Childeand Wheeler: Sumerians       *Rakhal Das Banerji Dravidians (Dravid)
                @ Unfamiliar with iron, advance: drainage system, trade and commerce, Mother Goddess evidences
                @ Cities excavated in Indus valley
                     1. Major cities
                       a. Harappa: Punjab, Pakistan
                           - 1923: excavation with continuity       -1920-2121 and 1933-34: Madhav Swaroop Vats         - 1946: Mortimer wheeler on large scale
                           - 2 mounds: eastern: city mound, western: castle mound
                           - remnants of Granary:  form of 12 rooms: two rows each, having six rooms each
                           - 1st artefact: stone seal with a unicorn and an inscription with animal symbols  and writings(  elephant, rhinoceros, tiger, deer, sheep) except cow 
                           
                        
                       b. Mohenjodaro: Sindh
                           - Mound of the dead men in Sindhi language
                           - Great bath: ritual bathing-> northeast:  ruins:  70.1 × 23.77 m
                                              : 55 m east-west and 33 m north-south
                                              :  Middle: pond measures 11.8 m x 7.04 m,  max depth of 2.43 m
                           -  Main road: width: 9.15 m: Rajpath           - straight road: intersect at the right angle              - parted roads form square and quadrangle shapes
                           - Artefacts: mother goddess idol, dancing girl statue, a seated male soapstone (Priest-King), Pashupati seal, elephants bones, skeleton in the wells, horse teeth, evidence:cotton 
                                            : Harappan seal: 1-humped bull, buffalo, tiger, rhinoceros,  goat, elephant.


                           
                          b.1. Chanhudaro:  130 km southeast of Mohenjodaro, Sindh:          - discoverer:  N.G. Majumdar, 1931        - excavator:  E.J.H. Mackay, 1935- 36
                                                     :   Jhukkar and Jhangar culture remnants found
                                                     :   industrial hub: shell making, bangle making, bead making, and Ornamented elephant, toys, the vestige of a dog, a cat, lipsticks found, phase cut bricks
               

                    2. Dockyard
                        a. Lothal:  on Bhogava River, tributary of Sabarmati, in the Gulf of Cambay, Ahmedabad district, Gujarat:  discoverer: S.R. Rao, 1954
                                      :  micro Harappa or micro Mohenjodaro city; port city 
                                      :  triple burial
                                      :  city divided into six sections  built on a wide platform of baked bricks separated by a road (12 to 20 ft)
                                      :  evidences: Rice husk, metal workers, shell ornament makers, bead makers shop, fire altars, terracotta figurine of- horse, ship; Persian seal, painted jar, ivory scale

                       # Kalibangan :   bank of Ghaggar River (Saraswati River), Hanumangarh district of Rajasthan: by- B.B. Lal, 1961
                                             :   findings: Ploughed agriculture field surface ( furrows), Mesopotamian seals, wheels of a toy cart, fire altars, 
                                             :   triangular terracotta cake with a carving of a horned deity on one side and an animal (goat) being dragged by a rope by a human on the other
                                             :   double burial

                        c. Dholavira
                          - 2nd largest site of Harappan Civilization in India (after Rakhigarhi), located in Rann of Kutch (Gujarat) : excavator:  R.S. Bisht, 1990-91
                          - great bath : 7 m in depth and 79m long
                          - rock-cut architecture reservoir: 80.4 m × 12 m and 7.5 m deep
                          - town: rectangular shape, three parts - fort, central town and lower town
                          - advanced water management system, a series of dams and channelizing waters
                          - inscription comprising ten large-sized signs of the Harappan scripts

                   3. Other Cities
                     a. Surkotada:          Kutch district, Gujarat                                                                                                                                                                - evidences: horse bones and pot burials 
                     b. Daimabad:          left bank of the Pravara River, Ahmednagar district of Maharashtra            - discoverer: B.P. Bopardikar, 1958
                     c. Rakhigarhi:         Hisar district of Haryana, in the Ghaggar-Hakra River plain                         - discoverer: Surajbhan, 1969
                     d. Ropar, punjab    left bank of the river Satluj, new name: Rupnagar                                         - discoverer: B.B. Lal, 1950                               - excavator: Yashdatt Sharma 1953-55
                     e. Rangpur:             Saurashtra region of western India, Arabian Sea coast, Gujarat                                                                                                - cultivated: Rice, Bajra and Millet. 
                     f.  Dadheri:            Govindgarh, district Ludhiana (Punjab)                                                        - famours: painted grey ware culture, aryans
                     g. Alamgirpur:        Meerut district, UP, along the Hindon River                                                - finds:  gold teraccota bead,  Utensils with triangle, peacock and squirrel, cloth evidence
                     h. Hulas:                 Saharanpur district, UP                                                                                 - finds: man made, wheel made pottery with geometric or naturalistic designs painted in 
                                                                                                                                                                             black, chert blades, bone points
                     i. Banawali:             valley of Ghaggar, Fatehabad district, Hisar Haryana                                    - finds:  Clay figures of the mother goddess, toy plough, terracotta replica of a plough
                     j. Bhagwanpura:      Kurukshetra district, Haryana, on the Southern bank of river Saraswati                                                                                     - excavated by J.P. Joshi
                     k. Manda:                bank of river Chenab in J&K, to procure wood from Himalayas, then send downstream to other towns.                                -  excavated by J.P. Joshi, 1982
                     l. Sonauli :               Baraut Tehsil, Baghpat district, UP                     - finds: 125 graves oriented in a N-Sdirection & human burials: along with animal bones, gold, copper, bangles 
                    m. Balu:                    Haryana                        
                    n. Padri:                   Gujarat
                    o. Kot Diji:               Sindh, Pakistan
                    p. Desalpur:             Kutchh, Gujarat.
           
      @ Hastinapur:   founder:  B.B. Lal (1950-52)
      @ Sohgaura:      village, bank of Rapti river in Gorakhpur, UP
                         :      copper plate inscription of Mauryan period found giving information about the storehouses present
      @ Kaushambi:   N.G. Majumdar (1936-37)
      @ V.A. Smith:   British Indologist and art historian
      @ Remains of Well and Bathroom: found in every major city of Indus Civilization.
      @ order, who came 1st: Urban culture> Iron plough> Punch- marked silver coins(6 B.C)> Gold coins(2nd century B.C)
      @ first metal used by man: Copper
      @ fall of Indus Valley Civilisation: due to continuous drought for 900 years( low or negligible rainfall )

       

            @ Sites and related rivers   
                          Harappa:           Ravi                           Kalibangan: Ghaggar                      Lothal:        Bhogwa                    Ropar:         Sutlej                    Sutkagendor:    Dasht
                          Mohenjodaro:   Indus                        Manda:        Chenab                       Daimabad:  Pravara                    Alamgirpur: Hindon                 Bhagwanpura:  Sarasvati
                          Hastinapur:       Ganga                        Nagarjuna Konda: Krishna             Paithan:       Godavari                 Harappa:     Ravi
 
       
           @ Ancient Egyptian Civilization:  banks of river Nile: ‘lifeline of Egypt',  for almost 3,000 years
                                                                                              :  north-flowing river in northeast Africa, longest river in the world
                                                             :  Indus Valley Civilization (India) and Mesopotamian civilisation of Egypt are the contemporary civilizations
           @ Sequence of the civilizations from North to South:
                                    Aztec: nomadic tribe in Northern Mexico.
                                    Maya:  tropical lowlands of present Guatemala
                                    Muisca: ancient Colombia
                                    Inca: highlands of Peru.
          @ Sumerian Civilization: first to develop art of writing in a proper system
                                                : Cuneiform script: earliest systems of writing
          @ Aryan Civilisation: rural, used grey painted potteries
          @ Later Vedic Society - Agrarian; Rigvedic Society - Pastoral, Medieval Period - Land Lordism
   * copper age

# HISTORIC : document evidence
   * vedic culture

# STONE AGE research : 1863
   * PALEOLITHIC
      @ depended on hunting
      @ unfamiliar with fire, farming, animal husbandry ( ate raw meat)
   - lower : handaxe, cleaver, chopper
           :  belan valley : 44 archeological sites
                           : research under G.R Sharma (Allahabad)
                           : Lohanda Nala region : bone made mother goddess
                                                 : preserved : Kaushambi museum
   - middle: points, borer, scrapper
   - upper : burins

  * MESOLITHIC
     @ known after discovery of Rock Painting in Vindhya region by : C.L. Carlyle (1867-68)
     @ domestication of animals
     @ sites :
         * evidence of domestication of animals : adamgarh : hoshangabad (MP)
                                                                       : Bagor ( bhilwara, rajasthan)
         * bones and horns implements : mahadaha : pratapgarh (U.P)
         * bone made pointed objects and ornaments : a.Sarai Nahar Rai b.Damdama c. Mahadaha
                                                                                   a. grave with 4 human skeletons  b. meso site : pratapgarh (UP) : 41 human graves : 5 double burial, 1 triple burial
                                       : book - puratattva vimarsh by Dr. Jai Narayan Pandey
                                           - 17 human skeltons were found from rock shelter 1 of Lekhahiya of vindhya region.
                                            * Lekhahiya : remnants of 27 human skeltons a/c to John R Lucas of Oregan University (USA)
         * Bhimbetka : rock shelters located 45km west of Bhopal. ( 133 pictures in 700 rock shelters)
                              : included by UNESCO in it's world heritage
                              : exhibits earliest traces of human life
                              : famous for rock paintings 
      
  * NEOLITHIC
       @ grains @ fire
       @ copper
               - age : chalcolithic : copper 
                       : Ahar Civilization : flourished : Mewar ( Rajasthan ) : copper tools, copper smelting, metal works, rice known, Black-Red pottery with white geometry design
               - age : copper : copper + stone 
                       : settlements : south east rajasthan, west MP, west maharashtra, south-east india
       @ agriculture : Lahuradewa site, Santkabir Nagar district ( UP)
                                  - human activity, rice cultivation : 9000-7000 BC
                                  - if option not present : mehrgarh : evidence of settled life
       @ rice : bank of river Belan ( prayag),  Koldihwa village
                          |
                       - rice bran : 6500BC
       @ wheat : mehrgarh village : Bolan Pass on Karachi Plain,  baluchistan ( pakistan) to the west of the Indus river valley : 7000 BC
                                                   :  earliest sites with evidence of farming and herding in South Asia
                            |
                           - cultural remains from stone age to harappan civilisation found
       @ Barley : 8000 BC in western asian countries b/w northeast mediterranean sea and iran. ( 1st)
           Wheat : as above 
           Rice : 7000 BC yangtaze river : china
           Maize : 6000 BC ( mexico)
           Millet : 5500 BC (china)
           Sorghum : 5000 BC ( east africa)
           Mustard : 5000 BC ( south east asia )
           Oat : 2300 BC ( europe)

           
 # SITES 
     * chopper chopping pebbles : sohan valley : punjab (pakistan)
                                              : research by L.Cambridge team under D.Tera 
     * hand axe pieces, cleaver, scrapper :  vadamadurai, attirapakkam : madras

# Jorwe culture people : in rectangle houses ( wattle, daub walls , thatched roof )
                                     : belived in life after death
                                     : burried dead inside houses under roof	
                                         |
                                        children : 2 urns, mouth- mouth, horizontally
                                        adults : head towards north
                                        sites :  daimabad, inamgaon, chandauli, nevasa
                                        ash mounds : sangana kallu : vellari district : mysore ( karnataka ) : neolithic                      
                                                            : piklihal , utnur

# Navodatli revealed : round residence : 3m in diameter 
                                    rectangular : 2m* 2.2m
                                    roofs :  hay, tree branches, leaves supported on wood : 22cm diameter
                                    open space : mud plastered bamboo screens
                                    house floors : slit clay, river gravel, lime coated surface
                                    1-2 mouthed chulhas
                                    site excavated by : H.D. Sankalia ( proff Deccan College, Pune ) 
                                                           at : Indore (MP) 
                                                              : most extensive excavated rural chalcolithic site ( b/w 1600 BC and 1300 BC )

# Ochre- coloured Pottery : porus, invariably worn out at edges, appearence - badly fired
                                          : discoverer- B.B Lal, 1951
                           evidence : Atranjikhera, Hastinapur

# Archeological Survey of India : Ministry of culture
                                                   : for archeological researches, protection of cultural heritage
                                                   : re-established : 1871 : Director General :Alexander Cunningham
                                                   : centralized : 1901 : Director General : John Marshell( 1902)  { reign : Lord Curzon }

# National Human Museum : renamed : Indira Gandhi NHM : Bhopal (MP)
                                                              : autonomous : dept of culture

# 3 age system : stone, bronze, iron  : by : Christian Jurgensen Thomson (1818, 1820 ) : Copenhegan Museum classification (1836)

# 1st evidence of man in India : west narmada region (MP) : 1982

# Harrapan Civilisation Site : Mandi : east of Yamuna (Muzzafarnagar, west UP)
                                                          : hoard of jwellery discovered : excavation by : DV Sharma ( 1999-2000) 

# Megaliths : burial sites away from habitation : Chamber tomb, Dolmens, Stone alignment, stone circle( cromlech) , pit circle






#VEDIC AGE

* Vedic: Sanskrit word 'Veda': knowledge
* Vedic or Aryan Civilization: that developed in India after Indus civilization
* Arya: Great/ highborn/ A noble man, the author of the Vedas, self designation by Indo-Iranian people; idea: religious, cultural and linguistic, not racial.
           : whose members composed the Zoroastrian scriptures, the Avesta and the Hindu scriptures, the Vedas:  from Iran
           : history- from Vedas
* Vedic Age:   Rigvedic or Pre-Vedic (1500-1000 BCE) , Later-Vedic Age (1000-600 BCE)
* Vedas: most ancient literature in India: 4: Rig, Sam, Yajur, Atharva
             : Vedtrayi: Rig+ Sam+ Yajur
             : Each of the Vedas is divided into four parts:  Samhitas+ Brahmanas= KarmaKanda segment;  Aranyakas+ Upanishads= Gyan-Kanda 
      a.  Rigveda                                                      : Hymns and prayer, God Grace, Aitariya
                                                                             :  oldest known book in world mentiones  : 4 rivers of Afghanistan: Krumu, Kubha, Gomati, Suvastu
                                                                             :  7 rivers of the Sapta-Sindhu: Saraswati, Vipasa, Parushni, Vitasta, Sindhu (Indus), Shutudri and Asakini
                                                                             : River Yamuna: 3 times; Ganga: 1 time; River Indus: most times and imp: called Hiranyani-> place where it falls: Peravat or Arabian Sea.
                                                                             :  Saraswati: most sacred/ pious, known as ‘Matetama’ (best of all mothers),Devitama (best of all goddesses), Naditama (best of all rivers)
                                                                             :  Ganga-Yamuna doab and its adjoining areas: called Brahmarshi Desh by Aryans
                                                                             :  area between Himalaya and Vindhyachal mountain: Madhya Desh
                                                                                river of Kashmir Marudvridha 
                                                                              : Chenab: river Askini:  Chandrabhaga: originates from Tandi in Lahul Spiti where two rivulets, Chandra and Bhaga meet to form this river
                                                                              :  Rivers Kubha (Kabul), Kramu (Kurram), Gomti (Gomal) and Suvastu (Swat) : flow through Afghanistan indicating relations of Aryans with the 
                                                                                Afghanistan.
                                                                             :  Modern names: Parushni - Ravi,   Sadaneera - Gandak,  Shutudri - Sutlej
                                                                             :  Chitrotpala in the Mahoba copper plate of Someshwar Dev:  Mahanadi ( during Mahabharata period) ->
                                                                                 praised as Punayadayini and Sin Vashinini in the Bhishma festival


               : 10 mandals( 2 to 7: most ancient); 
                          3rd mandal: Gayatri Mantra  by Vishwamitra  dedicated to Lord Sun (Surya)
                                            :  May the Almighty God illuminate our intellect to lead us along the righteous path.
                          9th mandal: 114 mantras dedicated to Soma
               : 1028 suktas and 10552 verses (Richa);    society: patriarchal-> Varun sukta tells that a father can sell his child;     polytheistic:  no. of Gods worshipped.
               : 3 varnas( colour/class) described in the beginning: Brahma , Kshatra , Visha 
               : Shudra- mentioned for the first time in Purush Sukta of 10th mandal
               : priest- Hota; Brahmans: Aitreya, Kaushitki; script: Brahmi
               : Patanjali says: 21 branches of Rigveda are there
               : Rishabhdev and Arishtanemi mentioned here
               
* Aryavarta: area where Aryans expanded themselves to the whole of North India
* Word stupa has been used for the first time:  tree stem, raised by the king Varuna 
                                                                         : Samadhis built on the ground after the burial of dead bodies
                                                                         : 4 types - 1. Sharirik (Body)  2. Paribhaugik  3. Uddheshika (Objective)  4. Pujarthak (Worshipping) 
                                                                         : Stupa at Bodhgaya: enlightenment of Buddha. 
                                                                         : Sanchi Stupa -  not related to any episode of Buddha’s life
                                                                                  - Sanchi/  Kaknam/ Kakanaya/  Kakanadabota / Bota-Sriparvata : Raisen district, MP. mauryan period
                                                                                                                                                                                         : remarkable specimen of Buddhist art and architecture
                                                                                                                                                                                         : Unesco world heritage site 'Mahastupa' (great stupa) stands here
* Vedic tribes - the Bharatas, the Purus, and the Kurus
* Shruti: Vedic literature    * religion of early Vedic Aryans: Worship of nature and yajnas-> sacrifice

* Dasharajnya/ ‘War of 10 Kings’:  on the bank of Parushni river
                                                      : before Ramayan: There lived a descendant of India’s eponymous king Bharata, named Sudas->  greatest achievement: victory over a confederacy of ten kings
* Brahmavadini :  hymns composed by women-> Lopamudra ( wife of Agastya Rishi/sage) , Vishwawara, Sikta, Nivavari and Ghosa.
* Family/ Kul: smallest unit  *Yava: barley        * Vrihi – Rice      * Mudga – Mung bean        *Yava – Millet         * Ikshu – Sugarcane
                                              *Nishka: gold necklace-> Coin  *Taksha: Carpenter  *Karma: Metal worker  *Veknat: Moneylender     *Aritri: Boatmen                           *Nivi: worn below waist
                                              *Kosa: treasury  *Gotra :  cow ( Aghanya: not worthy to be killed") shelter or family, lineage kin waist    *Pani: traders                                 *Vasas: worn above                                                                                                     
* Vedic Gods:  God of sky-Varuna ( Guardian of the Moral order (Rit)), Mitra, Surya, Vishnu
                         God of space- Indra ( most powerful) ( Purandara: Destroyer of forts, God of: War, Storm, Sky, thunder, rain, Svarga Dev, punnished sinners) ( 250 hymns devoted to him 1st),
                                              - Rudra            
                         God of earth- Agni ( 200 hymns, 2nd) , Brihaspati, Soma
                         Ekaikyavaad:  Supreme God
                         Ekeshwarvaad:  Ekm Satt Vipra bahudha badanti: includes vision of Advaityavaad, Sarvadevtavaad and Bahudevatavaad
                         Boghaz-Koi inscription ( Asia Minor, Turkey):  mention  Indra, Varuna, Mitra, Nasatyas ( 14th century)
                                                                                                   : depicts Aryan’s movement of Aryan from Iran to India
* post-Vedic period:  four stages- Brahmacharya, Grihastha, Vanaprastha,  Sanyasa,     4 purusharth:   Dharma, Artha, Kama, Moksha.
                                :  region of Kurus:   Panchala-> axis of Aryan culture 

* Cattle breeding:  economic activity  *prevalent system of governance: inherited monarchy        
                                                            
* Dharma: cosmic ordinance ( sense of natural or divine law) -> one’s duties to oneself and to others
* Rita: universal harmony,  Rit:  universal principal of natural order: basis of Indian culture, legal theory, politics and philosophy
                                                                                                                   God Varuna: uphold Rit or the natural order: Ritasyagopa

* Purohit:  Advisor of king               Senani:  Head of army                  Gramin:  Head of Village                         Mahishi: Wife of king                       Suta:  Head of Chariot army
   Sangrahita:  Treasurer                   Bhagdudh: Tax collector               Akshavap:  Accountant                            Palagal:  Messenger                           Kshata:  Keeper of the King's household

* 16 Sanskars:  3 - before birth, 12 - during life, 1 - after death.
                      :  Garbhadhana (Conception), Punsavana (Foetus protection), Simantonnayana (Satisfying the cravings of the pregnant mother), Jatakarma (Childbirth), Namakaran
                         Nishkramana (Taking the child outdoors for the first time), Annaprasana (Giving solid food), Mundan (Hair cutting), Karnavedha (Ear piercing) 
                         Vidhyarambha (Starting education), Upanayana (Sacred thread ceremony), Vedarambha (Study of Vedas), Keshant (Hair cut) 
                         Samavartana (Returning home after completion of education), Vivaha (Marriage) and Antyesthi (Cremation).

*  Brahmana era:  800 B.C. to 600 B.C
    Sutra Period :   7th century B.C. to 3rd century B.C.

* East: Samrat               * West:  Swarat                *North: Virat                * South:    Bhoj                 * Centre:  Raja
* Bal Gangadhar Tilak:  book The Arctic Home in the Vedas’: propounded the theory that North Pole (Arctic region): original home of Aryans
* Brihaspati- Deva-guru (teacher or priest of Gods):  guru of the Devas (Gods)
* Coat of mail and helmet made of gold and iron, possibly  used in warfare
* knew gold, silver and copper 
* owed their success in India to their use of :  horses and chariots:  Bhagwanpura site excavated in Haryana where horse bones have been found
                                                                       :  evidence- Mohanjo-daro, terracotta figurine from Lothal
                                                                       :  remains of the horse:  reported from Surkotada, West Gujarat,  (around 2000 BC)


 

      b.  Yajurveda  :      Hymns and rituals, Sacrifice process, Shatpatha
                                    wisdom of sacrificial formulas, compiled a century or two after the Rig-Veda
                            :       contains prose( procedural details) and verse formulas. contains Rights and Rituals related to Yajnas
                            :       Samhitas: two parts: Shukla (White) Yajur Veda [separate Brahmana text: Satapatha][Vajasneyi: Samhita][poetic]  and Krishna (Black) Yajur Veda[ poetic+prose]
                            :       Shatpath Brahmana: prose text describing Vedic rituals, history and mythology & social subjects including Vedic rituals
                                                                   : placed just after the Rig Veda; mentiones Purusha Medha-> in Shatpath Brahmana of Shukla Yajurveda and Taittiriya Brahmana of Krishna Yajurveda
                                                                   : story of King Videgha Madhava (a king of Videha) accompanied by his priest Rishi Gautama Rahugana
                                                                              : King was carrying fire (Agni Vaisvanara) in his mouth which on incitation of his guru fell out of his mouth and burned the earth towards his east.

 
     c.  Samaveda   :      Music, Panchvisha
                                    shortest among all the 4, taken many verses from the Rig Veda, for ritual application, its verses chanted in ceremonies
                            :       Samhita: 1875 verses, except 75 or 99 verses, all are compiled in Rig Veda

    d.  Atharvaveda  :     Charms and spells, Medicine, Gopatha
                                    Brahma: Priest Chanting mantras
                             :      first reference to the ‘Anga’ and ‘Magadha' along with Gandhari and Mujavats
                             :      ‘Ayurveda’: Science of Life’ appeared -> Upaveda of Atharvaveda->  Upanga of Atharvaveda
                             :      describes the thoughts and superstitions of common people
                             :      contents: disease prevention, coordination, loyalty, marriage and love poetry
                             :       Brahmana associated: Gopatha Brahmana,[ text associated: Shaunaka, Paippalada recensions]
                             :       axis of Aryan culture: region of Kuru & Panchala
                             :      Sabha ( assembly of the learned and elite) (council of ministers)( 8 times):  associated with the judicial function
                                    and the Samiti ( 6) ( for common) : controlling powers upon the autocracy of king :  two daughters of Prajapati.

* Upanishad          :     non religious, philosophical
                              :     salvation or Moksha: first discussed in Upanishads: liberation
                              :     the core of our self: Atman (Soul)
* Kathopanishad   :     conversation between Yama, Lord of death and Nachiketa, the young 12 years old boy who left home in search of the meaning of death and beyond.

* Mundakopanishad  :    Satyameva Jayate: truth alone triumphs: national motto of India
                                  :     adopted by the Government of India on 26 January, 1950.
* Shvetashvatara Upanishad :  means-> carried on a white horse not white horse
* Satyakama Jabala    :     boy, and later a Vedic sage:  first appears in chapter IV of ancient Hindu text, the Chhandogya Upanishad
                                  :     challenged the stigma of an unmarried mother.

* Tamso Ma Jyotirgamaya :  in Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, means - lead us from darkness to light or lead us from ignorance to truth.

* Puranas                 :  sacred literature of Hinduism. 18 Puranas:   Matsya,  Markandeya, Bhagavat,  Bhavishya,  Brahmanda,  Brahma Vaivrata,  Brahma, Vamana,  Varaha,  Vishnu,  Vayu, 
                                    Agni,  Narada,  Padma, Linga,  Garuda,  Skanda, Kurma
                                    Srimad Bhagvatam:  Crown Jewel:  Sanskrit:  700 verses
                                    Mahabharata:  Jaya/  Jayasamhita/ Shatasahasri-Samhita :  8,800 Shlokas; today: 100,000 Shlokas: by Sage Veda Vyasa
                                                         :  Kuninda-Kings-  Dwij Shrestha- mentioned in Sabha Parva of Mahabharata (Chapter 51, Part-1): Chief among Dwijs
                                    5 characteristics:    Sarga,  Pratisarga: natural creation and renovation (cosmogony).
                                                                   Vansa: history of Sage/ God
                                                                   Manvantara: period of different Manus 
                                                                   Vanshanucharit: Genealogy of kings.

* Pancha-Jana       :    5 specific tribes whose eponymous ancestors: founders of the clans, Yadu, Turvasa, Druhya, Anu and Puru. 
* Atranjikhera      :    prehistoric and historic excavated archaeological site on the bank of Kali river, a tributary of Ganga
                             :   identifier-  Alexander Cunningham, 1862,  excavator-  R.C. Gaur, 1962
                             :   earliest evidence of the use of iron in India (  1150 B.C. )
* Kshatriya kings :  who were great scholars and philosophers -  Janak of Videha, Pravahanjabali of Panchal,  Asvapati of Kekaya and Ajatshatru of Kashi
                               Kekaya kingdom: bank of river Beas, east of Gandhara kingdom 

* churning of the ocean of milk: Mount Mandara or Mandar Parvat->  used as the churning rod
                                                     Vasuki: the king of serpents who abides on Shiva’s neck->  became the churning rope
                                                     Lord Vishnu, in the form of Kurma Avtar-> rescuer and supported the mountain on his back

* Dharmashastra phase:  untouchability assumed definite shape ( Christian era )
* Ganga Dashehara/  Gangavataran :      celebrating the avatarana (descent) of the Ganges on Tenth bright lunar day of Jyeshtha
                                                         :      holy river Ganges descended from heaven to Earth
                                                         :      Dashami (10th day) of the waxing moon (Shukla Paksha), lasts ten days 
* Upadhyaya:  who taught Ved-Vedanga for livelihood





#BUDDHISM

* Gautama Buddha : From the Mauryan dynasty, emperor Ashoka’s Rummindei Pillar inscription -> born in Lumbini near Kapilavastu ( Nepal) , 563 BC
                               :  Siddhartha- childhood name, Tathagat- whose truth is the knowledge, Shakyamuni- due to his birth in Shakya clan.
                               :  father-  Shuddhodana-> Shakya clan chief;  mother-  Mayadevi/ Mahamaya ( Koliyan clan)[ died at an early age]
                               :  raised by- aunt Prajapati Gautami; married to - Yashodhara ( Gopa, Bimba, Bhadkachhana), daughter of Shakya Clan., at an age of 16
                               :  son - Rahul; impacting events: old man, a sick person, a deceased and the blessed Saints.
                               :  renunciation on horse named Kantaka accompanied by Channa - > Mahabhinishkramana: 29 years
                               :  met: Acharya of Sankhya philosophy, Alar Kalam, near Vaishali; reached Rajghrih ( spent 2, 3, and 4th year of rain) and met Dharmacharya Rudrak Ramputt -> reached 
                                  Vaishali ( Lichchhivi's capital) particularly Beluva suburb of Vaishali with disciple Anand,  spent the 5th year of the rain; also last rainy season ->
                                  reached Pava ( capital of Mallas) , stayed in Amravatika of Chund, a blacksmith. -> gave him Sukaramaddva’ food ,  causing him bleeding ->
                                  went to Kushinagar (Kushinara) : first capital city of Malla Kingdom, where he gave his last sermon to Subhaddha, his last disciple.
                                                     |
                                                Mahaparinirvana templev : Statue of Lord Buddha ( Chunar sandstone) -> 6.10 meters high, in lying pose, excavated in 1876 AD

                               :  visited Kaushambi -> King Udayana reign ( 9th resting place) -> donated Ghoshit Ram Vihar to Bhikshu Sangh under the influence of Pindola Bharadwaj
                               :  enlightened: Vaishakh Purnima after six years of continuous meditation, under a Bodhi tree in Bodh Gaya at the age of 35-> called Buddha
                                       @ Bodhi Tree : heritage site, bank of river Niranjana.
                                                                 king Shashank destroyed the original tree in the seventh century
                                                                 present tree - 5th generation tree planted by the orders of Alexander Cunningham
                               :  From Uruvela (Bodh Gaya) he first reached Rishipattan (present-day Sarnath, Varanasi)-> gave the first sermon  at the site of Deer Park at Sarnath to five Brahmin sanyasi->
                                  Dharmachakrapravartana, then Kosala, Kapilavastu Vaishali and Rajgriha, Magadh.
                               :  disciple: Amrapali ( Vaishali’s royal courtesan);  Anand
                               :  teacher : Alar Kalam -> Acharya of Samkhya philosophy, renowned for his spiritual strength.
                               :  eighth year of Enlightenment: women as Bhikshuni into Buddhist Sangha;  first woman to enter: aunt (Mahaprajapati)
                               :  cousin - Devadatta -> a follower,  then a follower and then became an enemy.
                               :  died -  Kushinagar (capital of the Republic Mall) in 483 BC at the age of 80 -> : Mahaparinirvana event
                                             didn't nominate any1 for the leadership of Buddhist Sangha
                               :  gave - Noble Eightfold Path and Four Noble Truths [ suffering, cause of suffering, cessation of suffering, path leading to the cessation]
                               :  known as - Light of Asia-> subtitled 'The Great Renunciation book - by Edwin Arnold, Prachhanna
                                                    1st edition : July 1879, based upon Lalit Vistara
                               :  discarded  vedic religion, believed in karma theory and noble deeds.
                               :  did not believe in the existence of God and his powers
                               :  1st human statue worshipped
                               :  propounded -  doctrine of momentariness : expounded the basic principle of impermanence.
                               
                         
 
 * Buddha statue : Mathura and Gandhara style - Kushana period
                              Mathura only                         - V.S. Agrawal
                              Kaushambi                             - Huein Tsang
 * sermon : theme - sufferings, it's cause, and it's solutions
                 : 1st - Mrigadava Sarnath ( Rishipattan ) ( Lion Capital of ashoka ) , Varanasi          Last - Kushinagar                Maximum - Shravasti ( capital of Kosala )

* Dharma Chakra Pravartana Sutta : means sermon of the turning of the wheel of law -> theme : eight-fold path-> Arya-Satya


* Birth :: Lotus & Bull   * Great Departure ( Mahabhinishkramana) :: Horse     * Enlightenment (Nirvana) :: Peepal (Bodhi tree)   * Death (Parinirvana) :: Stupa        * First Sermon :: Wheel

* For the residence :     * Bimbisara  ::  Magadha ruler built a Mahavihara called Velavan   *Lichchhivians :: built  Kutagrasala in Mahavan      * Amrapali :: provided his Amravatika 
                                      * Anathpindak ( Koshal king ) ::  donated  Jetavana Vihara             *Prasenjit ( Koshal king ) :: built Pubbarama (Pura - Ram) vihara

* Sthavir/ Theravadi :  First century who believed in traditional faith, leader - Mahakachchayan               
* Mahasanghika : who accepted the change, led by Mahakachchayan    
                           : off shoot : Lokottaravadin sect
                           : deification of Buddha by Mahasanghikas, fostered the Mahayana Buddhism

* 1st Buddhist Council : in the Saptaparni Cave
                                        president - monk Mahakasapa at Rajgriha, under the patronage of King Ajatshatru 
                                        Ananda recited Suttas and Upali. another disciple recited Vinaya. Abhidhamma Pitaka also included.
* 4th Buddhist council : in Kundalvana Kashmir , 
                                       reign - Kushan King Kanishka 
                                       president - Vasumitra,  Ashvaghosh : deputy President 
                                       divided Buddhism into : 
         @ Hinayana  :   believes in Buddha as a great man, Lesser vehicle.
                                  Individualistic religion, no belief in idol worship and devotion.
                                  aim -  attain Arhat, major sects - Vaibhashika and Sautrantika
                                  Sthaviravadins
                                  Chaitya -  largest cave temples, at Karle in Pune district of Maharashtra.
         @ Mahayana :   worshipping Buddha through idols treating him as God, Great Vehicle
                                  belief -  soul, rebirth. Emphasizes - philanthropy, service                                                                                             
                                  objective -  welfare of all mankind.  Principles - Bodhisattva,  simple, accessible.
                                  importance - common devotees, monk.
                                  ideal : Bodhisattva, major sect  - Shunyawad (Madhyamik) , Vigyanwad (yogachar)
                                 They delay achieving their salvation to help all sentient being on their path to do it.



* Sarvastivada : Doctrine that all exist     
                        : constituents of phenomena were not wholly momentary, but existed forever in a latent form.
* Impermanence/ Anitya    : doctrine and part of three marks of existence in Buddhism, presented by Buddha
                                            : all of conditioned existence, without exception, is transient, evanescent, inconstant 
                                            : World is unstable and transient    
* Sunyata/  doctrine of void : used by Nagarjuna ( Indian Einstein, school - Madhyamika ) 
                                             : one of the world's four  great guiding powers as called by Hiuen Tsang; from Kanishka court
                                             : travelled to China ( 1st century A.D. ) and preached Buddhism
                                             : Madhyamika Karika :  literary work -  theory of relativity discussed
* Anatman or Anatmavada : no-self - doctrine of Buddhism
* Maitreya : future Buddha, 1st appearance: in the Lakkavatti Sutta of Pali Tripitika
                  : Buddha spoke of a future time in which the dharma is entirely forgotten              
* Padma pani/ Lotus-Bearer/  Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara : epithets of Avalokiteshvara, the Bodhisattva of infinite compassion.
                                                                                            :  sculpture in a tribhanga or tri-bent pose
                                                                                            :  Bodhisattva - a living being ( (sattva) who aspires to enlightenment (bodhi) and carries out altruistic practices      
                                                                                            :  central to the Mahayana Buddhist tradition

* Doctrine of Buddhism :   Tripitaka literature -> 3 parts :   A. Sutta Pitaka : sayings and teachings of the Buddha
                                                                                                B. Vinaya Pitaka :  rules to be observed by members of the Sangha, rules of Monastic life
                                                                                                C. Abhiddhamma Pitaka : philosophical exposition of the Dhamma, ethics and doctrine
                                                                                                                                         : Digha Nikaya a  - collection of 34 long Suttas 
                                                                                                                                         : 7 books - Yamaka, Patthana, Kathavatthu, Puggalapannatti, Dhatukatha, Vibhanga and Dhammasangani
* Third Buddhist Council : in Pataliputra, reign - Ashoka, a/c to Sinhalese folklore – Dipavamsa & Mahavamsa
                                           : chairperson - Moggaliputta Tissa
* Jataka :  religious texts of the Buddhists ( Pali lang )
* Bhumisparsha Mudra: while attaining enlightenment; disturbed by demon Mara
                                        symbolizes - Buddha’s calling of the Earth to witness his purity and chastity despite the temptations of Mara (  steadfastness.)
                                        right hand : pendant over the right knee stretching towards the ground with the palm inward while touching the lotus throne
                                        left hand : with the palm upright in his lap
                                        Sarnath Buddha image - Gupta period
                                        Dhyani Buddha Akshobhya
* Centres of learning in India:  Nalanda, Vikramshila, Vallabhi ( for Hinayana Buddhism ):  attracted by China, Japan, Tibet and other countries of South-East Asia too.
                                                                                           |
                                                                                       in Gujrat, & capital of ancient Maitraka dynasty
                                               :  Taxila, Nalanda ( for Mahayana Buddhism) ( Gupta Period ) - Universities
                                                                   |
                                                              world’s 1st International University founded in the 450 AD by Kumargupta, identifier - Alexander Cunningham ( 1915-16)
                                                              famous for - Buddhist Religious Philosophy
                                                              by the end of the twelfth century, Mahavihara waned due to Muslim invasion.
                                                              importance declined bcoz Pala rulers of Bengal  gave protection to Vikramshila University.
                                               :  Odantipur/  Uddandapura : in Magadha, now Bihar, India. Established by the Pala emperor, Gopala first
                                               :  Navnalanda Mahavihara : modern Buddhist study centre, Established by the Bihar government in Nalanda,  1951 : Pali Research Centre

* Essence of Buddhist teachings : Pratiyasamutpada, rejected immortalization theory of soul, but accepted the principle of rebirth and Karma Theory
                                                    :  Did not reject caste and class, challenged highest social ranked Brahmins, pointed certain castes as low
* Buddhist monastery at Nalanda:  founder - Balaputradeva ( Suvarnabhumi ruler ) -> requested Devapala to grant, 5 villages for its maintenanace 
* Vikramshila Mahavihara : by Dharmapala ( Pala King )
* Donations to Nalanda Buddhist Vihara by :  Kumaragupta - I, Buddhgupta, Tathagatgupta Nava Nalanda and Baladitya
* Parth/ Gudakesh/ Arjuna: Mahabharat
* Triratna : Three jewels -> Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha : associated with Buddha philosophy
* Karmapa Lama belongs to the Kangyupa sects of Tibetan Buddhism.
* Adi Shankaracharya :     greatest philosophers of Hinduism  
                                          crypto Buddhist - challenged Buddhism 

* Pavarana : Confession by monks of their off ences committed during their stay in the monasteries during the rainy season
* Ashokaram monastery : Pataliputra, supervisor : Indragupta.
* Highest Vishwa Shanti Stupa in the world :   World Peace Pagoda (height 400 metres) situated on the hills of Rajgir in Bihar 
* Giant Buddha Statue :     Bodh Gaya, Bihar -  80 feet high - took 7 years to complete
                                           made of sandstone blocks and red granite
                                           built with the help of Daijokyo sect of Japan

* Navayana/Neo-Buddhism :    new Vehicle, re-interpretation of Buddhism by B.R. Ambedkar
                                                  rejects practices and precepts such as renouncing monk and monasticism, Karma, re-birth after life, samsara
                                                  revises the original buddha teachintgs about class struggle and social equality

* Paramitas : perfection, represent qualities that the bodhisathva strives to perfect in order to purify karma and kleshas and develop bodhichitta.
* Gandharan Buddha : inspired by Hellenistic realism, tempered by Persian, Scythian and Parthian models
                                     subject - life of Buddha.   images - Dharma Chakra , Meditation , Abhaya and Varada postures of Gautama Buddha

* Gandhara school of art:  Kushana rule, Kanishka
                                           sitting and standing posture of Buddha’s statues -> carved out in the Mathura school

* Upasaka : lay followers of Buddhism who are not monks.
   Parivrajaka : male renunciant & wanderer, Buddhist Bhikkhu -  Primarily a parivrajaka.
   Shramana :  a wandering monk in certain ascetic traditions ( Jainism, Buddism & Ajvikism )

* Pushyamitra Shunga :  founder, 1st ruler of the Shunga empire in east India ( (185-149 BCE )
                                    :  originally a S "General" of the Mauryan Empire.
                                    :  In 185 BCE,  assassinated : last Mauryan Emperor, Brihadratha
                                    :  cruelly persecuted ( didn't contribute ) the Buddhist
* Sects of Buddhism - Sautrantika, Sammitiya
* Common : Buddhism and  Jainism
       @ Indifference to the authority of the Vedas .
       @ Denial of efficiency of rituals
       @ Non-injury to animal life
       @ Philosophy of karma and transmigration of soul were correct

*Expansion of Buddhism : reasons - simplicity, Special appeal towards Dalits, Missionary concept of religion, Regional language
*Decline of Buddhism : in the early medieval times bcoz Buddha was by that time considered as one of the incarnations of Vishnu 
                                      : thus became a part of Vaishnavism
                                      : Kings of the Gupta dynasty were not opposed to Buddhism.
*Chaitya-Griha : Buddhist cave -  meeting/ assembly chamber - used for prayer ( worship place )
  Viharas :  shelter accommodations of the monks during the rainy season.  ( dwelling place )
  Guntuphalli : in west Godavari district of Andhra Pradesh
                      : has rock cut Chaityas and Viharas ( 2-49 century BC to 5-6 century AD )
                                                   : of eastern Deccan are generally constructed using bricks ( Nagarjunkaond, Bejwada, Moli, Ghantshala, Amravati and Chejali )
* Vajrayana sect of Buddhism :  most prominent in medieval period, flourished in the 8th century
                                                 : principles found in Manjushri Moolkalp and Guhyasamaja
* Ajanta Caves :  in the rocky northern wall of the V-shaped gorge of the Waghora river
                         : these are 30 rock-out Buddhist cave monuments in the Aurangabad district of Maharashtra. 
* Therigatha : Buddhist scripture where early nuns (bhikshunis) recount their struggles and accomplishments
 
 *BUDDHIST COUNCILS
Number                                 Year                                             Place                                President                                                                          Rulers
First                                       483BC                                         Rajgriha                           Mahakasappa                                                                     Ajatashatru
Second                                  383BC                                         Vaishali                            Sabakami                                                                           Kalasoka
Third                                     247BC                                         Pataliputra                       Moggaliputta ( Tissa)                                                         Ashok
Fourth                                   1st Century AD                            Kundal-vana                    Vasumitra Ashwaghosh (Vice President) Kanishk 


*BUDDHISTS TEXTS and their authors

Milindpanho                         :: Nagasen                   Madhyami Kakarika :: Nagarjuna               Abhidhmma Kosh :: Vasubandhu
Buddhcharita Saudaranand  :: Ashwaghosh            Vishuddhimagga :: Buddhaghosh               Sariputra  Prakaran :: Ashwaghosh  







# JAINISM

* Jain  - Sanskrit word ‘jin’ : winner
           -  universal law based, religion of Ahimsa (non violence)
           - does not trust in the concept of final annihilation of the world 
           - cardinal principles : Ahimsa, Anekantvad and Aparigraha
* Founders - Tirthankara ( 24 ) : Rishabhdev ( Bull ), Ajitnath ( Elephant ), Sambhavnath ( Horse),  Abhinandan, Sumatinath, Padmaprabha ( Lotus ), Suparshvanath ( Sathiya (Swastik) ),   
                                                     Chandraprabha,  Pushpadant (Suvidhinath),  Sheetalnath, Shreyansa-nath, Vasupujya, Vimalnath, Anantnath, Dharmanath, Shantinath ( deer),  Koonthunath, 
                                                     Aranath, Mallinath (Kalash (Urn)), Munisuvrata, Naminath ( Nilkamal (Blue lotus)), Neminath ( Shankha (Lonch) ) [ nirvan - urjayanta ] or Arishtanemi, 
                                                     Parshvanath ( Snake ), Mahavira Swami ( Lion)    
                                                                 
                                                     @ 1st - Rishabhdev ( other names Rishabhnath, Adinath, Vrishabhnath
                                                             - son - Bahubali
                                                             - originator of Jain religion
                                                             - nirvan place : ashtapad
                                                    @ 23rd - Parshvanath - born in Kashi (Varanasi), 850 BC : father - Ashwasen (king of Kashi), mother - Queen Vama of Varanas
                                                                                       -  Ikshvaku dynasty
                                                                                                     - during 3rd and 4th century, it ruled over southern India -> followed Vedic religion but also supported the Buddhist religion.
                                                                                                     - Bengal - prominent nucleus of Buddhism during Pala dynasty i.e Pala were patrons of Buddhism
                                                                                      - obtained Kaivalya (complete knowledge) in Ashrampad Udyan near Varanasi ( meditated for 84 days )
                                                                                      - attained Parinirvana on the mount Sammed Shikhar or Sammet Shikhar ( pilgramage place )
                                                                                      - four restraints - - Ahimsa (Non-violence), Aparigraha (forgoing-possession), Asteya (not-stealing) and Satya (truth)

*                                                 @ 24th - Mahavira Swami : born in Kundagram ( Kundalpur ) near Vaishali about 540 BC, childhood name : Vardhaman
                                                                                            : propagated the Jain philosophy 6th Century B.C
                                                                                            : father - Siddhartha (chief of the Gyatrik Kshatriya Sangh ) 
                                                                                            : mother - Trishala, sister of Chetaka, the head of Lichchhavi Republic
                                                                                            : elder brother - Nandivardhan
                                                                                            : wife - Yashoda (daughter of Kundinya Gotra)
                                                                                            : daughter - Anojja (Priyadarshana) -> husband - Jamali
                                                                                            : Kaivalya -  under a Sal tree on the bank of Rijupalika river near Jrimbhik village -> he z called Kevalin, Arhat (Yogya), Jin (Vijeta) and 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Nirgranth (Bandhan Rahit)
                                                                                            : uncle - Chetaka, Lichchhavi Chief of Vaishali
                                                                                            : first disciple : Jamali. Mahavira's son-in- law
                                                                                            : disciple - Makkhali Gosala -> founded his own creed, Ajivaka -> rendered - Fate assigns everything, human is incapable
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -> believed in abiding nature of destiny
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -> used the caves of Barabar as their shelter-house
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -> Sudama cave & Karn Chaupad - Ashoka Era 
                                                                                            : denied unmanliness of Vedas and opposed related social-cultural traditions
                                                                                            : accepted the middle path - Anekantavad / Syadvad ( Saptabhangi Naya : knowledge is relative )
                                                                                            : enlightenment -  bank of river Rijupalika in the village of Jrimbhik
                                                                                            : Nirvana ( death ) - in 527 BC in Pavapuri, located near Rajgriha (Rajgir) ( age : 72 years )
                                                                                            : Sangh - 11 major followers-> Ganadhar : Indrabhuti, Agnibhuti, Vayubhuti (three brothers), Arya Vyakta, Sudharman, Mandita, 
                                                                                                                                                                Mauryaputra, Akampita, Achalbhrata, Metarya, Prabhasa
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                            : Sudharman : 1st president of Jain Sangha after Mahavir's death
                                                                                                   |
                                                                                                death : Jambu - president of Sangh for 44 years
                                                                                            : At the time of the last Nand Ruler : Sambhootvijay and Bhadrabahu -  presidents of Sangha
                                                                                                                                                                 -  last persons to know about the ancient  Jain texts - 14 Purvas ( Ardh-Magadhi)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        - sixth century A.D. at Vallabhi near Gujarat
                                                                                                                                                                 -  Pataliputra the capital city - centre of learning and knowledge
                                                                                                                                                                         |
                                                                                                                                                                     1st Jain Sabha: 4th century (310 BC), president - Sthulbhadra:  12 Angas 
                                                                                                                                                                           : reign - Chandragupta Maurya; Shwetambara Agama were edited at Patliputra, 310 BC
                                                                                                                                                                     2nd : Vallabhi : 6th century (512 AD), prsident - Devardhigan or Kshamashraman
                                                                                                                                                                            : 12 Angas, 12 Upanga, 10 Prakirna, 6 Chedsutras, 4 Mulsutra, 2 Chulikasutra
                                                                                                                                                                            : Bhadrabahu did not participate
                                                                                                                                                                 -   severe famine for 12 years
                                                 
                                             @ 12th - Vasupujya  : Father of Vasupujya Bhagwan, Champa town king in the Bharat sub-continent
                                                                             :  Queen -  Jaya Devi -> benevolent -> Padmottar
                                                                             :  compassionate and charitable person
                                                                             :  Kevala Jnana - within one month of Tapsya
                                                                             :  Moksha at Champapuri, of Bihar in India on the 14th day of the bright half of the month of Ashadh


* Jain literature : Aagam (Principle) - 12 Angas : Sutra, Sutrakrtanga, Sthananga, Samavayanga, Bhagavati Vyakhyaprajnapti, Jnatrdharmakatha, Upasakadasah, Antakrddasah
                                                                             Anuttaraupapatikadasah, Prasnavyakarana, Vipaksruta and Dristivada
                                                         - 12 Upanga :  include the description of the universe, classifi cation of beings, astronomy, time division, description of posthumous life
                                                         - 10 Prakiran, 
                                                         - 6 Chedsutras : compilation of rules of Jain monks
                                                                                 : Jitakalpa, Brihatkalpa, Nishith, Mahnishith, Vyavhar (Behavior) and Aachar Dasha
                                                         - 4 Mulsutra : sermons of Jainism, life in the forest, duties of the monks, rules of Yam
                                                                             :  Dashvaikalik, Utaradhyayan, Shadavshayak and Pindniryukti or Pakshik Sutra
                                                         - 2 Chulikasutra : independent texts of Jains, which are a kind of encyclopedia; moral stories for monks.
                                                                                   : Nandi-sutra and Anuyagadvara-Sutra
                                                        -  Patron of Jainism : Samprati - Grandson of Ashoka; Major centre - Ujjain, 2nd major - Mathura.
                                                                                        : Kharwel - Chedhi ruler of Kalinga - built Vihars by cutting hills of Udaygiri and Khandagiri near Bhubaneswar
* Jain Doctorines : Anekantavada, Syadvada [ Saptabhangi theory ]
                             : surest way of annihilating karma : practice penance.
                             : Every object, even the smallest particle has a soul
                             : Karma is the bane of the soul and must be ended

     Lakulisa :: Pasupat           Nagarjuna :: Sunyavada          Bhadrabahu :: Jain              Gosala :: Ajivaka

* Niyatiwad : The belief of the sect -> every matter in the world is being controlled and operated by destiny ( fate )
* 5 great Vratas (vows) : Ahimsa, Satya, Brahmacharya, Asteya and Aparigraha
                                     : difficult to practice ->  follow Anuvratas 
* Jain Mahatmas - Nirgranth
* Moksha : Right Belief, Right Conduct,  Right knowledge - Ratnatraya : when remains of karma in the life are exhausted
* Sanvar Tattva : Freedom from the bondage and effect of evil omens
* Nirjara : destruction of Karma
* Anant Chattushtya : Anant Gyan - infinite knowledge    *Anant Darshan - infinite perception       *Anant Virya - infinite power    *Anant Anand - infinite bliss
* Digamabars  : founder : Bhadrabahuswami,
                        : skyclad- South, perform austerity (Tapsya)
                        : salvation : not possible for a woman
                        : Mahavir Swamy was unmarried
                        : Mallinath was man
                        : sect - Yapaniya -> worshipped nude images of the Tirthankaras in their temples
* Shwetambars : founder - Sthulabhadra
                         : white cloth - North
                         : taking food after attaining enlightenment
                         : sect - Sthanakvasi, founded in 1653 A.D.
                                  - origination -  predecessor reformist sect 'Lonka' that was found by Lonkasha.
                                  - belief -   idol worship is not essential in the path of soul purification and attainment of Nirvana.
                         : Canon included 12 Angas
* Khajuraho temple
* Dilawara Jain temple :  Mount Abu - marbles by Samanta Vimalshah of Chalukya (Solanki) ruler Bhimdev I of Gujarat
* Shravanabelgola : Karnataka
* Statue of Bahubali  :   Gomateshwar by PM, Chamundaraya in 981 A.D
                                  :   reign : Gang ruler Rachamall IV (Panchamalla)
                                  :   Festival : Mahamastak-abhishek :  held at Shravanabelagola in Karnataka every 12 years
                                  :   huge statue - height : 57 feet.

* Prabhasgiri : Jain pilgrimage site located in Kaushambi, U.P
                      : related to 6th Jain Tirthankar, Padmaprabha
* Jain Scriptures : Acarangasutra, Sutrakritanga, Brihatkalpasutra 
* Kalinga King Kharavela :  follower of Jainism.
* Samadhi Maran : Sallekhana /Sanyasna Maran - last vow prescribed by Jain ethical code of conduct
                                                                              - observed by Jain ascetics 
                                                                              - allowed when normal life is not possible due to old age, incurable disease, or when a person is nearing his end

* Barabar caves : at a distance of approx 30 Km from Gaya
                          : 4 caves on the Barabar hill - Ashoka inscriptions found on the walls of 3 caves, dating back to 6th century BC
                                                                       -  used by ascetics from the Ajivaka sect (founded by Makkhali Gosala)
                                                                       -  related to the Mauryan period (321-185 BC). 
* Kaushambi : district, carved out of Prayagraj on 4th April 1997, is located 33 miles away from the south-west of Prayagraj
                      : According to Puranas, Nicakshu, the sixth in line from Parikshita, transferred his capital from Hastinapur to Kaushambi 
                                                                                                                                                                                - due to being ravaged by flood, invasion of locusts and upheavals in the Kuru family
                     :  named after excess of Kushamb trees in the town
                     :  famous pilgrimage site of Jains and Buddhists
                     :  Ghoshitram monastery, built by Shresthi Ghoshit
* Shravanabelagola : city located in the state of Karnataka
                               : statue of Gommateshvara Bahubali - tirthas in Jainism, built by - Chamundraya
* Tawang town : Arunachal Pradesh
                         : Tawang Monastery - largest Monastery in India
* Khajuraho group of monuments : reign -  Rajput Chandela dynasty
* Hoyseleswara Temple : God Shiva
 


Kalpasutra :: Parishisht Parvan                         Nyaya Deepika :: ShlokVartik                              Bhadrabhu :: Hemchandra                         Dharmabhusan :: Vidyanand Swami
Syadvadmanjari :: Dravya Sangrah                   Panchvishatika :: Pravachansar                             Mallisen :: Nemichandra                             Padamnandi :: Kund kund
Tatvarth Sutra :: Nyayavtar                               Composers :: Bhadrabhu                                     Umaswami :: Shidhsen Diwakar








# MAURYA


* Chandragupta Maurya : established 1st Indian empire - from Iran in the north-west to present north Karnataka in the south 
                                                                                          - Beas to Indus river
                                                                                          - Bengal and Assam in the east to modern-day Afghanistan in the west
                                                                                          - to Kashmir and Nepal in the north and the Deccan plateau in the south
                                       : contribution - Kautilya ( also called Vishnugupta, Chanakya ) 
                                                                   - pioneer scholar of political science, book Arthashastra on Principles of Government 
                                                                                                                                                   |
                                                                                                                                        -> compared with Prince of Machiavelli, the great Italian thinker
                                                                                                                                        -> Saptang theory includes :
                                                                     King (Swami), Minister (Amatya), Territory (Janpada), Fort (Durg), Treasuryz, (Kosa), Army (Danda) and Allies (Mitra) ( ear of the state). 
                                       :  provincial governor - Pushyagupta -> constructed a dam for irrigation
                                                                                                          - description in - Junagarh inscription of Rudradaman of 150 A.D, state - Anarta and Saurashtra ( gujrat ) -> included in the 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mauryan Empire
                                                                                                          - proves sway over western India
                                       : ambassador - Dionysus sent by  King of Ptolemy II Philadelphus of Egypt, a/c to Pliny
                                       : defeated - Eastern part of Alexander's empire Seleucus, in 305 BC
                                       : conquered - Deccan plateau, Malwa, Gujarat, Maharashtra
                                       : revenue sources - Bhaga ( a share in produce from the land ), Bali
                                       : reign information - in Mudrarakshasa, authored by Vishakhdutta
                                                                                 - commentary by Dhundiraja where Chandragupta ( Vrishal & Kulheen )- son of Nandraja
                                                                      - Devichandraguptam & Abhisari Kavanchitakataken or Abhisarika- bandhitkam (unfounded) by - Vishakhadatta
                                                                      - recognizer : of Sandrokottos as Chandra Gupta Maurya - William Jones
                                                                                          : of Androkottus as Chandra Gupta Maurya - Aerian and Plutarch
                                                                      - describer : of the meeting of Sandrokottos & Alexander the Great : Justin, a Greek writer
                                      : Archaeological remains - discovered in Bulandibagh and Kumrahar near Patna (Ancient Pataliputra)
                                                                               - palace of Maurya was made of woods; excavator - D.B. Spooner
                                                                                                                                                               - city wall remains  from Bulandibagh, palace remains from Kumhrar  : Patliputra
                                      : Agronomoi - district officers
                                        Shulkadhyaksha -  who collected trade and service tax
                                        Akradhyaksha - controlled mines
                                        Sitadhyaksha - who maintained crown land -> Revenue collected - Sita
                                        Samaharta - regulation of revenue collection
                                        Antapal - looked after border forts
                                        Pradeshtha - administrator of commissionaries
                                        Pradeshika - modern day commissioner, performed judicial works.
                                        Pautavadhyaksha - in charge of weights and measures
                                        Panyadhyaksha - in charge of the Commerce Department
                                        Sunadhyaksha - chief of the slaughterhouse
                                        Pankodakasannirodhe - penalty in Mauryan administration for throwing dirt 
                                        Nagrak/ Purmukhya - municipalities that governed town administration 
                                        Yukta – district officials who collected revenue
                                        Rajjuka – surveyors in rural area
                                        Pradeshika - top official, divisional commissioner who performed judicial work
                                        Sarthwah - convoy of merchants, described in Arthashastra by Kautilya
                                                                                                                      |
                                                                                                                   2 courts : Dharmasthiya :: modern civil courts
                                                                                                                   Kantakshodhana :: modern criminal courts

* Brihadratha : Last Mauryan emperor - assassinated by his commander/lieutenant Pushyamitra Shunga in 184 B.C
                                                                                                                                         |
                                                                                                                                      established  : Shunga Dynasty
                                                                                                                                      fanatic Brahmin
                                                                                                                                      completed 2 Ashwamedh Yajnas -> supervisor - Patanjali - wrote Mahabhashya.

* Devabhuti : Last Shunga emperor - assasinated by conspiracy of his Amatya Vasudeva

* Susharma :  Last ruler of the Kanva dynasty - deposed by his Andhrian servant Simuk
* Satvahna : patronised Prakrit more than Sanskrit -> nurtures of Prakrit language
                  : public aspect of the arts developed
                  : Examples of architecture and sculptures found - associated with Buddhism.

* Ancient Dynasty : Mauryan dynasty 321 B.C. to 184 BC. > Kushan > Gupta dynasty (275 to 550 CE)  > Vardhana

* Bindusara   : Amitrochate, been addressed by Greek writers                                                                          
                      : Amitraghat (killer of enemies) - Sanskrit form;  Simhasena by Jain texts
                      : mother : Durdhara ; ambassador - Deimachus sent by Antiochus a/c to Strabo; he replaced Megasthenes
                      : demands from Syria - sweet wines, dry figs & philosopher

* Ashoka : viceroy of Avanti (Ujjayini); control - entire India except Assam and Deep South
                : Magadha throne - 269B.C
                : annexed Kalinga to the Mauryan Empire bcoz Kalinga controlled the land and sea routes to South India.
                : personal names - Gujarra, Maski, Nettur, Udgolam { inscriptions that contain names of Ashoka}
                : whole India came under his  kingdom, except Assam and some of the southern part of India, and Sri Lanka
                : inscription name - Devanampiya, Devanapiyadasi -> Beloved of the Gods -> validation of belief in Hinduism inspite of being Buddhist
                : Dipvamsa,  Mahavamsha : by Singhali hearsay ->  3rd Buddhist Council was held in Pataliputra : reign - Ashoka, chairperson - Moggaliputta Tissa
                : finilisation of name Ashoka - in 1915, by Maski inscription (Karnataka)
                : was Buddhist -> proof : Bhabru inscription -> Piyadasi Raja, Magadha
                : sequence of his religious trips - Lumbini, Kapilvastu, Bodhgaya, Sarnath, Kushingara, Shravasti
                : mentioned in -  Gujjara minor rock edict, Datia district, MP,  ( Ujjain to Bharuch. )
                : Samant Pasadika of Buddha Ghosh - wining the Avanti Mahajanpad and merging  it in the Mauryan empire during Bindusara rule.
                : announced - Dhamma Niti -> policy of peace, non-violence & religious toleration. ; Sinhalese folklore – Dipavamsa & Mahavamsa
                                     -  Rajdharma on triplex bases of longanimity, liberty and compassion
                : 14 major rock edicts 
                : 1st rock edict -  Ashok inscribed - here no living beings are to be slaughtered or offered in sacrifice.
                : 2nd rock edict - tells about Sangam Kingdom of Chola, Pandya, Satiyaputta,  Kerelaputta, Tamraparni (Sri Lanka)
                                          - not the part of Mauryan reign -> edge states
                                          - mentions South Indian kingdoms
                : 5th Pillar edict - Ashoka bans animal sacrifice on certain festive gathering, that probably included a ban on animal killing as well.
                : 12th rock edict - religious longanimity and growth
                                           - Whosoever praises his religious sect or blames other sects out of excessive devotion to his own sect, with the view of glorifying his own sect, he rather injures his own 
                                              sect very severely.
                : 13th rock edict - evidence - Kalinga war-> king Piyadasi (Ashoka) conquered Kalinga, eight years after his coronation, i.e. in 261 BC 
                                           - cordial relation with 5 Yavana kings - Antioch (Antiochus II Theos – the ruler of Syria)
                                                                                                         Turmaya or Turamaya (Ptolemy II Philadelphus – The ruler of Egypt)
                                                                                                         Antakini or Anikini (Antigonus Gonatas – The ruler of Macedonia)
                                                                                                         Mag, Makmaas or Megaras (The ruler of Cyrene)
                                                                                                         Alik Sundar or Aliero Sentro (Alexander Epirus or the king of Epirus )
                                           - tells about Sangam Kingdom
                : 5 provinces of Mauryan Empire found on the Ashokan inscriptions : Uttarapatha :: Taxila
                                                                                                                                  Avantiratha :: Ujjayini
                                                                                                                                  Kalinga :: Tosli 
                                                                                                                                  Dakshinapatha :: Suvarnagiri
                                                                                                                                  Prachyapatha :: Pataliputra 
                
 
                : constructed - Sarnath Pillar -> top - lion : symbol of power
                                                              -> replica: taken by indian gvn as its national emblem
                : stone pillars -  highly polished, monolithic,  tapered shaft pillars, not the parts of architectural structures
                : decipherer of Ashokan inscription - James Prinsep, 1837, Brahmi script -> edicts : mentioned King Devanampiya Piyadassi,  assumed to be Sri Lankan by Prinsep
                : Lumbini visit - after 20th year his coronation
                                        - exempted religious tax, as it was the birthplace of Buddha
                                        - reduced land revenue rate from 1/6 to 1/8.
                : 3 types of inscription -    
                        A.  Rock inscription/petrograph -  group of 14 various inscriptions, found at 8 places – Shahbazgarhi, Mansehra, Kalsi, Girnar, Dhauli, Jaugada, Yerraguddi and Sopara
                                                                            -  Prakrit language, Brahmi script, except - Shahbajgarhi & Mansehra which are in Kharoshti script ( N-W part of Mauryan Empire near Peshawar)
                                                                            -  inscription in Aramaic script is found from Taxila
                                                                            -  Shar-i-Kuna : Kandhar Inscription -> in the bilingual (Greek Aramaic)
                                                                            -  built the 1st hospital & herbal garden in India.
               : Bhabru inscription - proves Ashoka as Buddhist
                                                - referred to himself as Piyadasi Raja, Magadha
               : Kalsi - famous for Ashokan rock edict, Dehradun district, Uttarakhand. 

* Megasthenese : Greek historian, to India in fourth century B.C as  ambassador of Seleucus Nicator
                          : lived in court of Chandragupta Maurya for 5 years
                          : book - Indica -> contemporary India, Municipal, Pataliputra administration -> no slavery in ancient India
                                                  -> Pataliputra :  surrounded by the river Ganges in the North and by the river Sone in the West, built by Udayin
                                                                        : governed by a 30 member municipal council
                                                                        : 6 main committees, 5 members each
                                                                              :  6th board : responsible for the collection of sales tax -> every citizen must pay one-tenth of their earning as sales taxes to the government, else 
                                                                                                    punished with death.
                                                                                 3rd board : maintained record of registration of birth and death certificates
                                                                        : town officials - Astynomoi 
                         : Mauryan society into 7 categories : Philosophers,  Farmers, Herdsmen, Artisans, Military (Soldier), Overseers or Spies, Assessors
                                                     

* Kharoshti script : right to left, script of north-west India
* Sohgaura - earliest known copper plate -> Mauryan record -  preserve the food-grains to be utilized during the famine in the country
                                                                                                                        - for the same purpose : Mahasthan inscription, Bogre district
                                                                                                                                                                Satavahana inscription - land grants on the basis of religion

* Sanchi Stupa - Raisen district, MP, built : Ashoka, discoverer : Alexander Cunningham; best of all; 3rd century B.C
   Bharhut Stupa - Satna district, MPC, approx 3rd century B.C, discoverer : Alexander Cunningham
   Amravati Stupa - right bank of Krishna river, Guntur district of Andhra Pradesh, tracer - Lord Mackenzie, in 1797
   Dhamekh Stupa -  Varanasi, reign - Gupta
   Kanganahalli Buddha stupa - bank of Bhima river, Gulbarga district, Karnataka
                                                - stone portrait of Ashoka along with his Queen below which Ranya Ashoka (King Ashoka) has been written.


* Cholas evolved system to govern villages through autonomous elected panchayats
* Manusmriti  : mentions that  a widower whose wife is dead, could remarry but not vice versa
                       : Fallen Kshatriyas - foreign invaders who did not follow priestly customs or local traditions (Shakas, Kushans Hunas, Pratihar)

* Karddamaka ruler's coinage :   silver coins - quite frequent during the kshatrapas rule
                                                    potin coins 
                                                    copper coins were quite rare

* Kings and their Kingdoms :          Dhananjaya :: Kushalpura                             Ugrasena :: Palaka                                 Nilaraja ::  Avamukta                         Vishnugopa ::  Kanchi
                                                  
* Places and related Monuments :  Kaushambi :: Ghositarama Monastery           Sarnath :: Dhamek Stupa                      Kushinagar :: Ranabhar Stupa           Shravasti :: Sahet-Mahet   
                                                        
* Kings and Inscriptions :               Kumargupta I ::  Mandsore Inscription         Patika :: Takshila Inscription                 Samudragupta :: Erana Inscription

* Followers of Buddhism : Ashoka and his grandson Dasaratha
* Varanasi : capital of Kashi Mahajanapada in 6th century BC
                  : Bindusar, Haryank dynasty ruler, got it as dowry by marrying Mahakoshala (the sister of Kosala king Prasenjit)
                  : when Shishunag made Girivraj his capital (Shishunag made Vaishali his second capital) at that time he appointed his son as the Deputy king of Varanasi
                                     |
                               made Varanasi his 2nd capital

* Brahmi script : 1st deciphered through the letters inscribed on stone tablets
                          : 1st philologist - James Prinsep 
                          : efforts - Masson, Lassen, Norris, and Cunningham
* Pre-Ashokan Brahmi script - at Anuradhapura, Sri Lanka
                                                - evidence :  Piparaha, Sohgoura, Mahasthan 
* Rummindei Pillar of Ashoka - only to mark Birth of Buddha
* Mauryan emperors did not grant any land on religious basis and no description found about peasant revolt against land grants
        
                                                                           
                      








                           


 



       
                                                                                                  